{{Infobox device
| name        = Samsung Galaxy Tab A 10.5 (2018, LTE)
| image       =
| imagecaption=
| manufacturer= Samsung
| name        = Galaxy Tab A 10.5 (2018, LTE)
| codename    = samsung-gta2xllte
| released    = 2018
| type        = handheld (tablet)
| pmos_device = qcom-msm8953 (generic)
| chip        = Qualcomm SDM450 (MSM8953 family)
| cpu         = 8x Cortex-A53
| gpu         = Adreno 506
| display     = 1200x1920 DSI (Himax HX8279 TV101WUM)
| storage     = eMMC
| memory      = 3 GiB
| architecture= aarch64
| bootloader  = lk2nd
}}

The '''Samsung Galaxy Tab A 10.5 (2018, LTE)''' ('''SM-T595''', codename '''gta2xllte''')
is an SDM450/MSM8953 tablet. It is brought up on the mainline kernel using the
generic [[Qualcomm Snapdragon 450 (qcom-msm8953)|qcom-msm8953]] pmOS device package
plus a device tree (''sdm450-samsung-gta2xllte''). The Wi-Fi-only sibling is the
SM-T590 (gta2xlwifi, SDA450).

{{note|This is an early/alpha mainline port. Display, Wi-Fi and Bluetooth work, but
the touchscreen does not yet (no mainline driver for the panel's ST fts1ba90a), and
the device hard-resets under very heavy eMMC write load (e.g. installing large
packages on-device) — see [[#Known issues]].}}

== What works ==

{| class="wikitable"
! Feature !! State
|-
| Boot (mainline kernel + dtb) || {{Yes}}
|-
| Storage (eMMC, microSD) || {{Yes}}
|-
| USB networking + SSH || {{Yes}}
|-
| Display (simpledrm on lk2nd framebuffer) || {{Yes}}
|-
| Wi-Fi (wcn36xx) || {{Yes}}
|-
| Bluetooth || {{Yes}}
|-
| Volume / power keys || {{Yes}}
|-
| Touchscreen (ST fts1ba90a) || {{No}} (no mainline driver)
|-
| Real DSI panel driver (HX8279) || {{No}} (simpledrm used instead)
|-
| Modem (LTE) || {{No}} (not wired up)
|-
| GPU acceleration (Adreno 506) || {{No}}
|-
| Audio, sensors, cameras || {{No}}
|}

== Installation ==

The device uses '''[[lk2nd]]''' as a secondary bootloader. gta2xllte is already
supported by lk2nd-msm8953 (matched via the <code>T595*</code> bootloader string,
msm-id 338 / board-id 8,4).

=== 1. Flash lk2nd ===

Build/flash lk2nd for msm8953 (see [[lk2nd]]). After this the device exposes a
fastboot interface from lk2nd.

=== 2. Build the kernel with the gta2xllte device tree ===

The device tree (''sdm450-samsung-gta2xllte.dts'', submitted to
msm8953-mainline/linux) is not yet in a release, so build the kernel from a tree
that contains it:

<syntaxhighlight lang="shell-session">
# add sdm450-samsung-gta2xllte.dts to arch/arm64/boot/dts/qcom/ + Makefile,
# then build the pmaports kernel package against that tree:
pmbootstrap build --src=/path/to/linux linux-postmarketos-qcom-msm8953
</syntaxhighlight>

Required kernel config additions (on top of the generic msm8953 config):
* <code>CONFIG_DRM_SIMPLEDRM=y</code> + <code>CONFIG_DRM_KMS_HELPER=y</code> + <code>CONFIG_DRM_GEM_SHMEM_HELPER=y</code> (display)
* <code>CONFIG_TOUCHSCREEN_STMFTS</code> (touch attempt)
* Wi-Fi/BT stack built-in for RAM-boot testing (<code>CONFIG_WCN36XX</code>, <code>CONFIG_QCOM_WCNSS_PIL</code>, <code>CONFIG_QCOM_WCNSS_CTRL</code>, <code>CONFIG_BT_QCOMSMD</code>, <code>CONFIG_CFG80211</code>, <code>CONFIG_MAC80211</code>)

=== 3. Install pmOS ===

<syntaxhighlight lang="shell-session">
pmbootstrap init        # device: qcom-msm8953, UI of choice, systemd
pmbootstrap install
</syntaxhighlight>

{{tip|Install large UIs (e.g. Plasma) via pmbootstrap host-side rather than with
on-device <code>apk add</code> — heavy on-device writes trigger a hard reset (see
[[#Known issues]]).}}

=== 4. Flash ===

<syntaxhighlight lang="shell-session">
# device in lk2nd fastboot
pmbootstrap flasher flash_rootfs
pmbootstrap flasher flash_kernel
</syntaxhighlight>

== Device tree notes ==

* SoC base: <code>#include "sdm450.dtsi"</code> + <code>"pm8953.dtsi"</code>. The board
  has '''only PM8953''' — do not include pmi8950/pmi8937 (the SPMI probe fails and
  blocks everything behind it).
* DT selection: <code>qcom,msm-id = <338 0></code>, <code>qcom,board-id = <8 4></code>.
* '''Display''': no mainline driver lights the HX8279 (its VSP/VSN come from an
  ISL98608 with no mainline driver). simpledrm reuses lk2nd's continuous-splash
  framebuffer at <code>0x90001000</code>; the real <code>&mdss</code>/<code>&mdss_dsi0</code>
  are disabled. Framebuffer geometry: 1200x1920, stride 1200x3, <code>r8g8b8</code>
  (24-bit; 32-bit gives a sheared image).
* '''Wi-Fi/BT''': WCNSS pronto + iris <code>qcom,wcn3680</code>. Needs the device's
  NV calibration blob at the <code>firmware-name</code> path
  <code>qcom/sdm450/samsung/gta2xllte/WCNSS_qcom_wlan_nv.bin</code> or wcn36xx fails
  with -2.
* '''eMMC needs HS400''' to boot — capping to HS200 breaks boot reads.

== Known issues ==

* '''Hard reset under heavy eMMC writes''' — installing large packages on-device
  (e.g. <code>breeze-icons</code>, full Plasma) triggers an instant reset with no
  kernel log. Not CPU DVFS, not low disk space. Suspected regulator/power issue.
  Workaround: build the rootfs host-side with pmbootstrap and flash it.
* '''Touchscreen''' — the panel uses an ST '''fts1ba90a'''; the mainline
  <code>stmfts</code> driver does not speak its protocol (powers on, responds on
  i2c, then <code>SYSTEM_RESET</code> times out, -110). Needs a driver. Use SSH or
  a USB keyboard meanwhile.
* '''No NFC''' — the hardware has none.

== See also ==

* Device tree / port repo: https://github.com/m8l8th814n-eng/gta2xllte-mainline
* Kernel DTS: msm8953-mainline/linux PR #254
* [[lk2nd]]
* [[Qualcomm Snapdragon 450 (qcom-msm8953)]]

[[Category:Samsung]]
[[Category:Devices]]
